---
title: "Don't count frames to calculate time"
date: "2021-09-29T16:21:15+01:00"
author: "erri120"
authorTwitter: "erri120"
tags: ["Game Development", "RPG Maker", "JavaScript"]
keywords: ["RPG Maker MV", "RPG Maker MZ"]
description: "RPG Maker MV/MZ uses the amount of rendered frames to calculate how long player has been playing the game. They sadly forgot that 60 frames do not always equal 1 second and that you can just use a timestamp instead. This is a very simple fix that you should implement in your game after reading this post!"
showFullContent: false
readingTime: false
---

## Time and Frames

We have all heard the term FPS, frames per second, which tells us how many frames are rendered on screen within one second. Higher FPS will result in smoother animations because those animations get more frames. The problem with high FPS is that the GPU has to keep up with this demand and be able to produce 30/60/144 or more frames within 1 second. This is where frame times, VSync and a bunch of offer stuff that I won't cover here comes into play.

The important takeaway is that you can not reliably calculate a duration based on how many frames where rendered because not every frame takes the same amount of time. This is a problem when you want to eg smoothly move an object from one position to another. Engines like Unity solve this by providing a delta time [^1] which is the interval from the last to the current frame so you can have smooth translations.

[^1]: See `Time.deltaTime` in the docs [here](https://docs.unity3d.com/ScriptReference/Time-deltaTime.html)

## Looking at RPG Maker MV/MZ

So what issue does RPG Maker have? I have recently played a game for around 21 hours but the save menu displayed over 51 hours, more than double. Actually not just more than double but around 2.4 times more than expected. This quickly made me realize that I had been playing the game on my 144Hz monitor meaning instead of rendering at 60 FPS, the game was rendering at 144 FPS. I hope you notice that `60 x 2.4` equals `144`.

To further investigate the problem I took a peek inside the `js` folder, did a quick search for "playtime" and found the culprits of my frustration:

```javascript
Game_System.prototype.onBeforeSave = function() {
    this._framesOnSave = Graphics.frameCount;
    // ...
};
```

```javascript
Game_System.prototype.onAfterLoad = function() {
    Graphics.frameCount = this._framesOnSave;
    // ...
};
```

```javascript
Game_System.prototype.playtime = function() {
    return Math.floor(Graphics.frameCount / 60);
};
```

```javascript
Game_System.prototype.playtimeText = function() {
    var hour = Math.floor(this.playtime() / 60 / 60);
    var min = Math.floor(this.playtime() / 60) % 60;
    var sec = this.playtime() % 60;
    return hour.padZero(2) + ':' + min.padZero(2) + ':' + sec.padZero(2);
};
```

A quick explanation: whenever you save, the game includes the amount of frames it has rendered in the save file because `Game_System` is serialized in the save file and `_framesOnSave` is a field of that object. Of course when you load the save will get deserialized and `Graphics.frameCount` will be set back to that value. In case you are wondering: `Graphics.frameCount` gets incremented on each render.

This is fine so far but the real problems are found in the `playtime` and `playtimeText` functions where the game assumes you constantly playing at 60 frames per second. The pure `frameCount` gets divided by `60` to get the amount of seconds passed and in `playtimeText` that result is further processed to the get hours and minutes.

Due to the multiple issues outlined at the beginning you can see that this is not a good idea. Having said that: let's look at how to fix this.

### Possible Solution

This solution is probably the easiest and most straightforward one I can think of:

- on load/start: set `startTime` to the current time
- on save:
  1) get the current time and calculate the difference between now and `startTime`
  2) add the difference to a variable in the save

No need for frame count calculations or anything complex, just use `Date.now()` a few times and get the difference.

### Changing the implementation in RPG Maker MV

Start by opening `js/rpg_objects.js` and look for the `initialize` function. Here we want to add two new fields:

```javascript
Game_System.prototype.initialize = function() {
  this._startTime = Date.now();
  this._playtime = 0;
  // ...
}
```

`Date.now()` returns the current [Unix time](https://currentmillis.com/) as an integer that looks like this: `1632928643900`.

We need to set the start time in the `initialize` function for when the game starts and in the `onAfterLoad` function for when the player loads a save file:

```javascript
Game_System.prototype.onAfterLoad = function() {
  this._startTime = Date.now();
  // ...
}
```

The `onBeforeSave` function gets called before the save is serialized so here we have to calculate the time difference and reset the start time:

```javascript
Game_System.prototype.onBeforeSave = function() {
  this._playtime += Date.now() - this._startTime;
  this._startTime = Date.now();
  // ...
}
```

Assuming the player started at `1632928643900` and played for 1 second till `1632928644900`, `this._playtime` will now be `1000`. The only thing remaining is updating the `playtime` function:

```javascript
Game_System.prototype.playtime = function() {
  return Math.floor(this._playtime / 1000);
};
```

Since this function returns the amount of time passed in seconds we have to divide by 1000 to convert from milliseconds to seconds. While we are at it, I also recommend updating `playtimeText`:

```javascript
Game_System.prototype.playtimeText = function() {
  var secondsPassed = this.playtime();
  var minutesPassed = Math.floor(secondsPassed / 60);
  var hoursPassed = Math.floor(minutesPassed / 60);

  var sec = secondsPassed % 60;
  var min = minutesPassed % 60;
  var hour = hoursPassed % 24;

  return hour.padZero(2) + ':' + min.padZero(2) + ':' + sec.padZero(2);
};
```

The main difference here is that we cache the result from the `playtime` function and other operations.

### Plugin for MV/MZ

If you don't want to mess with the game files directly, which is a good idea, then I suggest taking a look at the [`PlaytimeFix` plugin](https://github.com/erri120/RPGMakerPlugins#playtimefix) which I developed that does everything explained in this post.

## Afterword

This issue has been bugging me a lot during my playthroughs of longer games because you don't really notice it when your playtime goes from 1h to 2 hours but going from 21 hours to 50+ hours was a bit more in my face. RPG Maker MZ also doesn't fix this and I have not seen any discussion about this.
